Health benefits of donating blood 
Blood is high in demand globally. Human blood cannot be manufactured by industries. Blood can be received only from donors. 

There are a lot of myths surrounding donating blood. Donating blood has a lot of health benefits. 

Donating blood doesn’t just limit its benefits to the receiver but also offers health benefits to the donors. 

When you donate blood, new blood cells are formed. The unhealthy cells get eliminated.

They keep a check on your health, and blood donation requires a basic test such as pulse, blood pressure, body temperature, haemoglobin level etc.

When you donate blood, the risk of developing cancer is very low. Blood donation makes you mentally happy. 

Someone is desperately in need of help, and your blood might save a life. 







Blood cell production 
After a person donates blood, the body will replenish the blood loss by stimulating the production of new blood cells.
The new blood cells would help in maintaining a person’s good health. 





Heart and liver health 
Donating blood is beneficial as it reduces the risk of heart and liver ailments that are caused due to iron overload in the body. 

When people consume excess food in the body, they only absorb limited proportions, and the rest of it gets stored in the heart, liver or pancreas. 

Excess iron present in the body will increase the risk of developing health conditions like liver failure, pancreatic damage or heart abnormalities. 

Therefore, by donating blood, the body can maintain the required levels of iron and reduce the risk of various health conditions. 






Blood groups that can donate blood
Blood groups are categorised by the presence or absence of certain antigens. If the acceptor is not compatible with the blood transfusion, there might be an immune reaction.

A protein called the Rh factor determines the blood type. Eight common blood groups are determined by the presence or absence of the Rh factor.

The blood groups are A positive (A+), A negative (A-), B positive (B+), B negative (B-), O positive (O+), O negative (O-), AB positive (AB+) and AB negative (AB-).

The O negative blood (O-) is a universal donor. It has high demand because it can be transfused to any blood group.

The universal plasma donor is the AB type. 

Blood type	Donate blood to	Accept blood from
O Positive	O+, A+, B+, AB+	O+, O-
A Positive	A+, AB+	A+, A-, O+, O-
B Positive	B+, AB+	B+, B-, O+, O-
AB Positive	AB+ Only	All Blood Types
O Negative	All Blood Types	O-
A Negative	A-, A+, AB-, AB+	A-, O-
B Negative	B-, B+, AB-, AB+	B-, O-
AB Negative	AB-, AB+	AB-, A-, B-, O-




56 Facts about Blood
1. More than 4.5 million patients need blood transfusions each year in the U.S. and Canada.
2. 43,000 pints: amount of donated blood used each day in the U.S. and Canada.
3. Someone needs blood every two seconds.
4. Only 37 percent of the U.S. population is eligible to donate blood – less than 10 percent do annually**.
5. About 1 in 7 people entering a hospital need blood.
6. One pint of blood can save up to three lives.
7. Healthy adults who are at least 17 years old, and at least 110 pounds may donate about a pint of blood—the most common form of donation—every 56 days, or every two months. Females receive 53 percent of blood transfusions; males receive 47 percent.
8. 94 percent of blood donors are registered voters.
9. Four main red blood cell types: A, B, AB and O. Each can be positive or negative for the Rh factor. AB is the universal recipient; O negative is the universal donor of red blood cells.
10. Dr. Karl Landsteiner first identified the major human blood groups – A, B, AB and O – in 1901.
11. One unit of blood can be separated into several components: red blood cells, plasma, platelets and cryoprecipitate.
12. Red blood cells carry oxygen to the body’s organs and tissues.
13. Red blood cells live about 120 days in the circulatory system.
14. Platelets promote blood clotting and give those with leukemia and other cancers a chance to live.
15. Plasma is a pale yellow mixture of water, proteins and salts.
16. Plasma, which is 90 percent water, makes up 55 percent of blood volume.
17. Healthy bone marrow makes a constant supply of red cells, plasma and platelets.
18. Blood or plasma that comes from people who have been paid for it cannot be used to human transfusion.
19. Granulocytes, a type of white blood cell, roll along blood vessel walls in search of bacteria to engulf and destroy.
20. White cells are the body’s primary defense against infection.
21. Apheresis is a special kind of blood donation that allows a donor to give specific blood components, such as platelets.
22. 42 days: how long most donated red blood cells can be stored.
23. Five days: how long most donated platelets can be stored.
24. One year: how long frozen plasma can be stored.
25. Much of today’s medical care depends on a steady supply of blood from healthy donors.
26. 2.7 pints: the average whole blood and red blood cell transfusion.*
27. Children being treated for cancer, premature infants and children having heart surgery need blood and platelets from donors of all types, especially type O.
28. Anemic patients need blood transfusions to increase their red blood cell levels.
29. Cancer, transplant and trauma patients, and patients undergoing open-heart surgery may require platelet transfusions to survive.
30. Sickle cell disease is an inherited disease that affects more than 80,000 people in the United States, 98 percent of whom are of African descent.
31. Many patients with severe sickle cell disease receive blood transfusions every month.
32. A patient could be forced to pass up a lifesaving organ, if compatible blood is not available to support the transplant.
33. Thirteen tests (11 for infectious diseases) are performed on each unit of donated blood.
34. 17 percent of non-donors cite “never thought about it” as the main reason for not giving, while 15 percent say they’re too busy.
35. The #1 reason blood donors say they give is because they “want to help others.”
36. Shortages of all blood types happen during the summer and winter holidays.
37. Blood centers often run short of types O and B red blood cells.
38. The rarest blood type is the one not on the shelf when it’s needed by a patient.
39. There is no substitute for human blood.
40. If all blood donors gave three times a year, blood shortages would be a rare event (The current average is about two.).
41. If only one more percent of all Americans would give blood, blood shortages would disappear for the foreseeable future.
42. 46.5 gallons: amount of blood you could donate if you begin at age 17 and donate every 56 days until you reach 79 years old.
43. Four easy steps to donate blood: medical history, quick physical, donation and snacks.
44. The actual blood donation usually takes about 10 minutes. The entire process – from the time you sign in to the time you leave – takes about an hour.
45. After donating blood, you replace the fluid in hours and the red blood cells within four weeks. It takes eight weeks to restore the iron lost after donating.
46. You cannot get AIDS or any other infectious disease by donating blood.
47. 10 pints: amount of blood in the body of an average adult.
48. One unit of whole blood is roughly the equivalent of one pint.
49. Blood makes up about 7 percent of your body’s weight.
50. A newborn baby has about one cup of blood in his body.
51. Giving blood will not decrease your strength.
52. Any company, community organization, place of worship or individual may contact their local community blood center to host a blood drive.
53. Blood drives hosted by companies, schools, places of worship and civic organizations supply roughly half of all blood donations across the US.
54. People who donate blood are volunteers and are not paid for their donation.
55. 500,000: the number of Americans who donated blood in the days following the September 11 attacks.
56. Blood donation. It’s about an hour of your time. It’s About Life.